MIME type and character set extraction
======================================

The `zope.mimetype.typegetter` module provides a selection of MIME
type extractors and charset extractors.  These may be used to
determine what the MIME type and character set for uploaded data
should be.

These two interfaces represent the site policy regarding interpreting
upload data in the face of missing or inaccurate input.

Let's go ahead and import the module::

  >>> from zope.mimetype import typegetter

MIME types
----------

There are a number of interesting MIME-type extractors:

`mimeTypeGetter()`
  A minimal extractor that never attempts to guess.

`mimeTypeGuesser()`
  An extractor that tries to guess the content type based on the name
  and data if the input contains no content type information.

`smartMimeTypeGuesser()`
  An extractor that checks the content for a variety of constructs to
  try and refine the results of the `mimeTypeGuesser()`.  This is able
  to do things like check for XHTML that's labelled as HTML in upload
  data.


`mimeTypeGetter()`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We'll start with the simplest, which does no content-based guessing at
all, but uses the information provided by the browser directly.  If
the browser did not provide any content-type information, or if it
cannot be parsed, the extractor simply asserts a "safe" MIME type of
application/octet-stream.  (The rationale for selecting this type is
that since there's really nothing productive that can be done with it
other than download it, it's impossible to mis-interpret the data.)

When there's no information at all about the content, the extractor
returns None::

  >>> print(typegetter.mimeTypeGetter())
  None

Providing only the upload filename or data, or both, still produces
None, since no guessing is being done::

  >>> print(typegetter.mimeTypeGetter(name="file.html"))
  None

  >>> print(typegetter.mimeTypeGetter(data=b"<html>...</html>"))
  None

  >>> print(typegetter.mimeTypeGetter(
  ...     name="file.html", data=b"<html>...</html>"))
  None

If a content type header is available for the input, that is used
since that represents explicit input from outside the application
server.  The major and minor parts of the content type are extracted
and returned as a single string::

  >>> typegetter.mimeTypeGetter(content_type="text/plain")
  'text/plain'

  >>> typegetter.mimeTypeGetter(content_type="text/plain; charset=utf-8")
  'text/plain'

If the content-type information is provided but malformed (not in
conformance with RFC 2822), it is ignored, since the intent cannot be
reliably guessed::

  >>> print(typegetter.mimeTypeGetter(content_type="foo bar"))
  None

This combines with ignoring the other values that may be provided as
expected::

  >>> print(typegetter.mimeTypeGetter(
  ...     name="file.html", data=b"<html>...</html>", content_type="foo bar"))
  None


`mimeTypeGuesser()`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A more elaborate extractor that tries to work around completely
missing information can be found as the `mimeTypeGuesser()` function.
This function will only guess if there is no usable content type
information in the input.  This extractor can be thought of as having
the following pseudo-code::

  def mimeTypeGuesser(name=None, data=None, content_type=None):
      type = mimeTypeGetter(name=name, data=data, content_type=content_type)
      if type is None:
          type = guess the content type
      return type

Let's see how this affects the results we saw earlier.  When there's
no input to use, we still get None::

  >>> print(typegetter.mimeTypeGuesser())
  None

Providing only the upload filename or data, or both, now produces a
non-None guess for common content types::

  >>> typegetter.mimeTypeGuesser(name="file.html")
  'text/html'

  >>> typegetter.mimeTypeGuesser(data=b"<html>...</html>")
  'text/html'

  >>> typegetter.mimeTypeGuesser(name="file.html", data=b"<html>...</html>")
  'text/html'

Note that if the filename and data provided separately produce
different MIME types, the result of providing both will be one of
those types, but which is unspecified::

  >>> mt_1 = typegetter.mimeTypeGuesser(name="file.html")
  >>> mt_1
  'text/html'

  >>> mt_2 = typegetter.mimeTypeGuesser(data=b"<?xml version='1.0'?>...")
  >>> mt_2
  'text/xml'

  >>> mt = typegetter.mimeTypeGuesser(
  ...     data=b"<?xml version='1.0'?>...", name="file.html")
  >>> mt in (mt_1, mt_2)
  True

If a content type header is available for the input, that is used in
the same way as for the `mimeTypeGetter()` function::

  >>> typegetter.mimeTypeGuesser(content_type="text/plain")
  'text/plain'

  >>> typegetter.mimeTypeGuesser(content_type="text/plain; charset=utf-8")
  'text/plain'

If the content-type information is provided but malformed, it is
ignored::

  >>> print(typegetter.mimeTypeGetter(content_type="foo bar"))
  None

When combined with values for the filename or content data, those are
still used to provide reasonable guesses for the content type::

  >>> typegetter.mimeTypeGuesser(name="file.html", content_type="foo bar")
  'text/html'

  >>> typegetter.mimeTypeGuesser(
  ...     data=b"<html>...</html>", content_type="foo bar")
  'text/html'

Information from a parsable content-type is still used even if a guess
from the data or filename would provide a different or more-refined
result::

  >>> typegetter.mimeTypeGuesser(
  ...     data=b"GIF89a...", content_type="application/octet-stream")
  'application/octet-stream'


`smartMimeTypeGuesser()`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The `smartMimeTypeGuesser()` function applies more knowledge to the
process of determining the MIME-type to use.  Essentially, it takes
the result of the `mimeTypeGuesser()` function and attempts to refine
the content-type based on various heuristics.

We still see the basic behavior that no input produces None::

  >>> print(typegetter.smartMimeTypeGuesser())
  None

An unparsable content-type is still ignored::

  >>> print(typegetter.smartMimeTypeGuesser(content_type="foo bar"))
  None

The interpretation of uploaded data will be different in at least some
interesting cases.  For instance, the `mimeTypeGuesser()` function
provides these results for some XHTML input data::

  >>> typegetter.mimeTypeGuesser(
  ...     data=b"<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?><html>...</html>",
  ...     name="file.html")
  'text/html'

The smart extractor is able to refine this into more usable data::

  >>> typegetter.smartMimeTypeGuesser(
  ...     data=b"<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>...",
  ...     name="file.html")
  'application/xhtml+xml'

In this case, the smart extractor has refined the information
determined from the filename using information from the uploaded
data.  The specific approach taken by the extractor is not part of the
interface, however.


`charsetGetter()`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you're interested in the character set of textual data, you can use
the `charsetGetter` function (which can also be registered as the
`ICharsetGetter` utility):

The simplest case is when the character set is already specified in the
content type.

  >>> typegetter.charsetGetter(content_type='text/plain; charset=mambo-42')
  'mambo-42'

Note that the charset name is lowercased, because all the default ICharset
and ICharsetCodec utilities are registered for lowercase names.

  >>> typegetter.charsetGetter(content_type='text/plain; charset=UTF-8')
  'utf-8'

If it isn't, `charsetGetter` can try to guess by looking at actual data

  >>> typegetter.charsetGetter(content_type='text/plain', data=b'just text')
  'ascii'

  >>> typegetter.charsetGetter(content_type='text/plain', data=b'\xe2\x98\xba')
  'utf-8'

  >>> import codecs
  >>> typegetter.charsetGetter(data=codecs.BOM_UTF16_BE + b'\x12\x34')
  'utf-16be'

  >>> typegetter.charsetGetter(data=codecs.BOM_UTF16_LE + b'\x12\x34')
  'utf-16le'

If the character set cannot be determined, `charsetGetter` returns None.

  >>> typegetter.charsetGetter(content_type='text/plain', data=b'\xff')
  >>> typegetter.charsetGetter()
